The President:
There were many causes of the turmoil that ripped through our
economy over the past two years.
But above all, this crisis
was caused by the failures in
the financial industry.
What's clear is that this
crisis could have been avoided
if Wall Street firms
were more accountable,
if financial dealings
were more transparent,
and if consumers and
shareholders were given more
information and authority
to make decisions.
But that didn't happen.
And that's because special
interests have waged a
relentless campaign
to thwart even basic,
common-sense rules -- rules
to prevent abuse and protect consumers.
In fact, the financial industry
and its powerful lobby have
opposed modest safeguards
against the kinds of reckless
risks and bad practices that
led to this very crisis.
The consequences of this
failure of responsibility --
from Wall Street
to Washington --
are all around us:
8 million jobs lost,
trillions in savings erased,
countless dreams diminished or denied.
I believe we have to do
everything we can to ensure that
no crisis like this
ever happens again.
And that's why I'm fighting
so hard to pass a set of Wall
Street reforms and
consumer protections.
A plan for reform is currently
moving through Congress.
Here's what this plan would do.
First, it would enact the
strongest consumer financial
protections ever.
It would put consumers back in
the driver's seat by forcing big
banks and credit card
companies to provide clear,
understandable information
so that Americans can make
financial decisions
that work best for them.
Next, these reforms would bring
new transparency to financial dealings.
Part of what led to this crisis
was firms like AIG and others
making huge and risky bets -- using things like derivatives --
without accountability.
Warren Buffett himself once
described derivatives bought and
sold with little oversight as
"financial weapons of mass destruction."
That's why through reform we'd
help ensure that these kind of
complicated financial
transactions take place on an
open market.
Because, ultimately, it is a
marketplace that is open, free,
and fair that will allow
our economy to flourish.
We'd also close loopholes to stop the kind of recklessness
and irresponsibility
that we've seen.
It's these loopholes that
allowed executives to take risks
that not only endangered
their companies,
but also our entire economy.
And we're going to put in place
new rules so that big banks and
financial institutions will pay
for the bad decisions they make
-- not taxpayers.
Simply put, this means no
more taxpayer bailouts.
Never again will taxpayers be
on the hook because a financial
company is deemed
"too big to fail."
Finally, these reforms hold Wall
Street accountable by giving
shareholders new power
in the financial system.
They'll get a say on pay: a vote
on the salaries and bonuses
awarded to top executives.
And the SEC will ensure that
shareholders have more power in
corporate elections, so that
investors and pension holders
have a stronger voice in
determining what happens with
their life savings.
Now, unsurprisingly, these
reforms have not exactly been
welcomed by the people who
profit from the status quo --
as well their allies
in Washington.
This is probably why the special
interests have spent a lot of
time and a lot of money lobbying to kill or weaken the bill.
Just the other day, in fact, the
Leader of the Senate Republicans
and the Chair of the Republican
Senate campaign committee met
with two dozen top Wall Street
executives to talk about how to
block progress on this issue.
Lo and behold, when he
returned to Washington,
the Senate Republican
Leader came out against
common-sense reforms
that we've proposed.
In doing so, he made the cynical
and deceptive assertion that
reform would somehow
enable future bailouts --
when he knows that it would
do exactly the opposite.
Every day we don't act, the same
system that led to bailouts
remains in place -- with the exact same loopholes and the
exact same liabilities.
And if we don't change
what led to the crisis,
we will doom ourselves
to repeat it.
That's the truth.
Opposing reform will leave
taxpayers on the hook if a
crisis like this
ever happens again.
So my hope is that we can put
this kind of politics aside.
My hope is that Democrats and
Republicans can find common
ground and move
forward together.
But this is certain: one way or
another, we will move forward.
This issue is too important.
The costs of inaction
are too great.
We will hold Wall
Street accountable.
We will protect and empower
consumers in our financial system.
That's what reform is all about.
That's what we're fighting for.
And that's exactly what
we're going to achieve.
Thanks so much.